As we spend time with family and
friends this Labor Day weekend,
many of us will also be thinking
about the state of working America.
Yesterday, we received a report
showing that job losses have
slowed dramatically compared
to just a few months ago.
Earlier in the week, we learned
that the manufacturing sector
has posted its first
gains in 18 months,
and that many of the banks that
borrowed money at the height of
the financial crisis are now
returning it to taxpayers with interest.
These are only the most recent
signs that the economy is
turning around, though these
signs are little comfort to
those who've experienced the
pain of losing a job in the
previous month, or in the
previous two years of this recession.
That's why it's so important
that we remain focused on
speeding our economic recovery.
Throughout America today,
tens of thousands of recovery
projects are underway, repairing
our nation's roads, bridges,
ports and waterways;
renovating schools;
and developing renewable energy.
We're putting Americans back
to work doing the work America
needs done -- and mostly
in private sector jobs.
But even as we take aggressive
steps to put people back to
work, it's also important that
we keep faith with men and women
looking back on a
lifetime of labor;
hard-working Americans who
deserve to know that their
efforts have resulted
in a secure future,
including a secure retirement.
For this recession has not
only led to the loss of jobs,
but also the loss of savings.
The drop in home
values, for example,
has also meant a drop in the
value of the single largest
investment most families have.
And the decline in the financial
markets has led to a decline in
the value of 401(k)s and
other sources of savings and
retirement security.
As a result, over
the past two years,
the American people have lost
about $2 trillion in retirement savings.
This carries a painful toll.
I've heard from so many who've
had to put off retirement,
or come out of retirement,
to make ends meet.
I've heard from seniors who
worked hard their whole lives
but now, in their golden years,
are unsure of where to turn to
pay the bills, afford
the prescriptions,
or keep the home in which
they raised a family.
And having too little in
savings not only leaves people
financially ill-prepared
for retirement,
but also for whatever
challenges life brings.
It places in jeopardy
so many dreams,
from owning a home
to attending college.
The fact is, even before
this recession hit,
the savings rate was
essentially zero,
while borrowing had risen and
credit card debt had increased.
Many were simply struggling
to stay afloat as incomes were
stagnant -- or falling
-- and jobs were scarce;
that's important to remember.
But there were also those
who spent beyond their means.
And more broadly, tens of
millions of families have been,
for a variety of reasons, unable
to put away enough money for a
secure retirement.
Half of America's workforce
doesn't have access to a
retirement plan at work.
And fewer than 10% of those without workplace retirement
plans have one of their own.
We cannot continue
on this course.
And we certainly can't go back
to an economy based on inflated
profits and maxed-out
credit cards;
the cycles of speculative
boom and painful busts;
a system that put the interests
of the short-term ahead of the
needs of long-term.
We have to revive this economy
and rebuild it stronger than before.
And making sure that folks have
the opportunity and incentive to
save -- for a home or college, for retirement or a rainy day --
is essential to that effort.
If you work hard and meet
your responsibilities,
this country is going to honor
our collective responsibility to
you: to ensure that you can
save and secure your retirement.
That's why we're announcing
several common-sense changes
that will help families put
away money for the future.
First, we're going to make it
easier for small businesses to
do what large businesses do:
allow workers to automatically
enroll in a 401(k) or an individual retirement account.
We know that automatic
enrollment has made a big
difference in participation
rates by making it simpler for
workers to save -- and that's why we're going to expand it to
more people.
Second, we'll make it easier for
people to save their federal tax
refunds, which 100
million families receive.
Today, if you have a
retirement account,
you can have your refund
deposited directly into your account.
With this change, we'll make
it easier for those without
retirement plans to save
their refunds as well.
You'll be able to check a box on
your tax return to receive your
refund as a savings bond.
Third, we'll make it possible
for employees to put payments
for unused vacation and sick
days into their retirement plans
if they wish.
Right now, most workers
don't have that option.
And fourth, the IRS and the
Treasury Department are creating
a plain-English, easy-to-follow
guide, as well as a website,
to help folks navigate what are
often very complicated waters,
especially for workers changing
jobs who often are unsure how
best to continue
saving for retirement.
Because the rules ought to be
written to encourage people to
save -- instead of
discouraging them.
We'll also build on these
steps by working with Congress.
As part of my budget, I've
proposed ensuring that nearly
every American has access to
a retirement savings account
through his or her job.
This plan would make it possible
for workers to automatically
enroll in IRAs through
payroll contributions.
And the budget simplifies
and expands a tax credit for
millions of families, matching
half of a family's savings up to
$1,000 per year and depositing
the tax credit directly into a
retirement account.
This is a difficult
time for our country.
But I'm confident that we can
meet the challenges we face and
leave behind something better;
that we're ready to take
responsibility for our
future once again --
as individuals and as a nation.
I hope that all of you have the
chance to enjoy this Labor Day
weekend with family and friends.
But my larger hope and
expectation is that next Labor
Day, the economic storms we're
weathering now will have given
way to brighter and
more prosperous times.
Thank you.